README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# multimorbidity

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of multimorbidity is to create as single package which can take
original claims data, clean and organize them to a simple format, which
can then be immediately used to obtain any of a number of comorbidity
and multimorbidity measures. This package is meant to be a simple and
transparent one-stop-shop for those working with claims or other
administrative health care data. The measures included in this package
have been developed by other researchers and are detailed in depth
below.

This package is meant to be both user-friendly and transparent. An
individual should feel comfortably understanding what’s ‘under the hood’
with these various metrics and the functions are written in a way that
makes this possible.

## Warning and Notice

This package is currently under development. Code contained on this site
may not have been robustly tested and it is not recommended to use any
of this code while this warning remains.

## Installation

There is currently no released version of ‘multimorbidty’ on CRAN.

The development version can be downloaded from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("WYATTBENSKEN/multimorbidity")
```

## Citation Information

In addition to citing this R Package, we ask that you please cite the
original manuscripts which developed these algorithms.

## Included Algorithms and Indices

### Elixhauser Comorbidity Index

The Elixhauser Comorbidities and Comorbidity Index are a widely-used set
of comorbidities originally developed in
[1998](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9431328/), with two indices for
mortality and readmission created in
[2017](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28498196/).

In this package, we used the codes provided in the format programs by
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality for
[ICD-9](https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidity/comorbidity.jsp),
[ICD-10
Beta](https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidityicd10/comorbidity_icd10_archive.jsp),
and
[ICD-10](https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidityicd10/comorbidity_icd10.jsp).
The ICD-10 data contain a larger set of comorbidities and, as of this
writing, no calculator for the indices has been released, and thus when
data contain both ICD-9 and ICD-10, we will use the ICD-9 comorbidities
with the Beta code. Finally, the original algorithm takes into account
DRG, which this package currently does not accomodate.

Commit message:

Updating README, adding vignette, and adding Charlson function.

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# multimorbidity

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of `multimorbidity` is to create as single package which can
take original claims data, clean and organize them to a simple format,
which can then be immediately used to obtain any of a number of
comorbidity, frailty, and multimorbidity measures. This package is meant
to be a simple and transparent one-stop-shop for those working with
claims or other administrative health care data. The measures included
in this package have been developed by other researchers and are
detailed in depth below.

This package is meant to be both user-friendly and transparent. An
individual should feel comfortably understanding what’s ‘under the hood’
with these various metrics and the functions are written in a way that
makes this possible.

## Warning and Notice

This package is currently under development. Code contained on this site
may not have been robustly tested and it is not recommended to use any
of this code while this warning remains.

## Installation

There is currently no released version of `multimorbidty` on CRAN.

The development version can be downloaded from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("WYATTBENSKEN/multimorbidity")
```

## Citation Information

In addition to citing this R Package, we ask that you please cite the
original manuscripts which developed these algorithms. Portions of this
package, specifically, the Elixhauser and Charlson diagnoses codes, were
adapted from another package,
[`comorbidity`](https://github.com/ellessenne/comorbidity).

## Included Algorithms and Indices

### Elixhauser Comorbidities and Index

The Elixhauser Comorbidities and Comorbidity Index are a widely-used set
of comorbidities originally developed in 1998 by
Elixhauser(<https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9431328/>), with two indices
for mortality and readmission created in 2017 by [Moore et
al.](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28498196/).

In this package, we used the codes provided in the format programs by
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality for
[ICD-9](https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidity/comorbidity.jsp),
[ICD-10
Beta](https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidityicd10/comorbidity_icd10_archive.jsp),
and
[ICD-10](https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/comorbidityicd10/comorbidity_icd10.jsp).
The ICD-10 data contain a larger set of comorbidities and, as of this
writing, no calculator for the indices has been released, and thus when
data contain both ICD-9 and ICD-10, we will use the ICD-9 comorbidities
with the Beta code. Finally, the original algorithm takes into account
DRG, which this package currently does not accommodate.

### Charlson Comorbidities and Index

The Charlson Comorbidities and Index are, similarly, a widely-used set
of comorbidities. First developed in 1987 by [Charlson et
al.](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/3558716/), they’ve been modified a
number of times. This algorithm employs the [Deyo et
al.](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1607900/) list of 17 comorbidities,
with the adaptations included in [Quan et
al.](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16224307/)
